Using cochlear implants from Cochlear
=====================================

To directly stimulate subjects using cochlear implants from Cochlear,
APEX 4 uses the NICv2 interface, provided by Cochlear. This interface is
abstracted as the L34Device (to be used under ). It is always called
L34, irrespective of the device that is used with NICv2 (which can be an
L34 but also an SP12 or other devices).

L34 setup
---------

To use APEX 4 with the L34 device, you need the L34 plugin, which is
provided on request, provided you sign the Cochlear NIC agreement.

After obtaining the L34 plugin (in the form of the file ), copy it to
the directory under the main APEX directory. You also need a properly
setup Cochlear NICv2 environment. We refer to the NICv2 documentation on
how to do this. For APEX 4 it boils down to having the right version of
NICv2 (the same APEX 4 was compiled against) and having the Nucleus NIC
binaries directory in your path. If this part is setup correctly, you
should be able to use the L34 device with device number 0 (the simulated
device).

Before starting an APEX 4 experiment that uses the L34device, make sure
the appropriate devices are connected to the computer and the NIC
environment is setup correctly.

### Debugging

When using the L34 device, APEX 4 starts a helper program (nic3slave.py).
APEX 4 communicates with the helper program (using domain sockets for
linux and named pipes for windows), and sends commands to the helper
program. In turn the helper program communicates with the L34 device and
executes those commands. Because APEX 4 doesn’t communicate directly with
the L34 device, the L34 debug output needs to be piped from the helper
program to APEX 4. When you enable verbose in the device section of your
experiment file, this debug output will be printed in the apex message
window.
You will need to use the long notation when defining your device with
verbose, for example:

```xml
      <device>
          protoslave: slave=nic3slave,verbose;
          platform=L34,implant=CIC4,auto_pufs=off,go_live=on,
          min_pulse_width_us=25.0,flagged_electrodes=,
          latency_ms=1000,mode=MP1+2
      </device>
```

Electrical stimulation files
----------------------------

When using the L34 device, you need prefined stimulation patterns.
Electrical stimulation patterns are not stored in the wave format, such
as for the wavdevice, but as one of the following file types:

qic

:   In a qic file, 2 parameters are specified per stimulus: the channel
    to be used and the magnitude (in %). Before a qic file can be sent
    to the NICv2 interface, it thus first has to be mapped by apex.

qicext

:   electrode, magnitude (CU), period, phasewidth, phasegap

xml

:   defined by cochlear (ref?)

Either of these files can be generated using the Nucleus Matlab Toolbox,
provided by cochlear. The most important difference between xml
stimulation files and other simulation files, is that for the latter
APEX 4 will do channel mapping using a user map defined in the experiment
file.

### Generating .qic files

In files, pulses are defined by a certain magnitude (between 0 and 1)
and a channel. They can be generated by the Matlab function and written
to disk using the function. A .qic file can be read back into matlab
using the function.

As the period is constant for an entire qic file, powerup frames have to
be inserted in the file if no stimulation is desired at a certain
instant.

Parameters of the L34 device
----------------------------

To use the L34 device, define a under , use the attribute.

The L34 device has some main parameters:

device

:   Device identifier. For NIC 2, this identifier consists of three
    parts: the device type, the implant type and the device number. The
    device type should be L34. The implant can be either (Esprit3G or
    Sprint or Freedom with old internal part) or (Freedom with new
    internal part). The device number corresponds to the order of the
    COM ports as defined in the Windows device manager, e.g. the first
    L34 connected to the computer has id 1. There is a simulated device
    with id 0, which allows to debug experiments without having an
    L34 connected. Note that triggering does not work properly with the
    simulated device.

When using or files, APEX 4 calculates the number of current units on the
basis of the defined map. The map can be either entered directly in the
experiment file (inline) or derived from the Nucleus fitting software
R126 (fromR126). The following map parameters should be defined: number
of electrodes, mode, pulsewidth, pulsegap, period (1/total rate) and the
C’s and T’s for the different channels.

Example:

```xml
    <devices>
     <device id="l34"  xsi:type="apex:CohDeviceType">
        <device>l34-cic3-1</device>

        <defaultmap>
        <inline>
        <number_electrodes>3</number_electrodes>
        <mode>MP1+2</mode>
        <pulsewidth>25</pulsewidth>
        <pulsegap>8</pulsegap>
        <period>138.9</period>
        <channel number="1" electrode="22" threshold="120" comfort="150"/>
        ...
        <channel number="22" electrode="1" threshold="130" comfort="152"/>
        </inline>
     </defaultmap>
    </device>
    <devices>
```

Note that Cochlear numbers the electrodes from 22 (apex) to 1 (base).
You can use either convention in your file, as long as the above map is
specified correctly.

Note also that when using stimulation files in the XML format, the map
is not used.

Bilateral stimulation
---------------------

For bilateral stimulation, two devices with each a map need to be
defined. To control the order of starting both devices, you can specify
a master device. If a master device is specified, this will be the last
device started. If not specified, the devices are started in order of
appearance in the experiment file. The device that sends a trigger
signal will typically be the master device.

The element can be used to specify trigger signals to be sent or
received. The specifies a trigger out signal to be sent and the tells
the device to wait for a trigger signal before starting stimulation.

Example:

```xml
    <master>l34-1</master>
    <device id="l34-1"  xsi:type="apex:CohDeviceType">
        <device>l34-cic3-1</device>
        <trigger>out</trigger>
        ...
    </device>
    <device id="l34-2"  xsi:type="apex:CohDeviceType">
        <device>l34-cic3-2</device>
        <trigger>in</trigger>
        ...
    </device>
```

Note that datablocks are attached to a device, and need to be defined
twice if they are to be used with both devices.
